---
title: "You Don't Get Paid to Write Dependencies"
pubDate: "Feb 25, 2023"
draft: false
---

You don't get paid to write dependencies. To an extent, I think
everybody knows this. But it's worth saying bluntly because people
will not say it to your face. Instead they'll attempt to say other,
nicer things, like "don't reinvent the wheel" or "not-invented-here
syndrome". But really, that's what they mean.

You don't get paid to write dependencies because your users don't care
about your dependencies. Your users aren't deciding to use your
library on the basis of your node_modules size. Sure, dependencies can
have an impact on your users. But that impact is often
overestimated. Your users are not going to care if you distribute a
binary that is a few megabytes too big. They're not going to care if
you use a CLI parsing library instead of writing your own.

And if they do care, if the difference between someone using your code
and not is a few megabytes of storage, that's not really a
defensible moat.

There are exceptions to this rule. If you work on libraries or on
tooling, you obviously get paid to write dependencies. Many people who
work on open source do indeed get paid to write dependencies. And this
is where the disconnect happens. Because those people tweet and they
publish blogs[^1] and if you read this content, you start to get the
impression that hey, I should write my own dependencies. However, the
people who are writing *your* dependencies are still not writing *their*
dependencies. They're building their product, which happens to be your
dependency.

[^1]: Indeed this blog is written by someone who works in tooling and
    open source.

You may say, hey, I looked at React's dependencies and they only have
one dependency. Yeah but they're **React**. They have approximately a
bajillion users. If you have a bajillion users you can write your
dependencies.

The other exception is big tech. At big tech you can spend your whole
career writing dependencies. Though again, these dependencies are
almost always other people's dependencies and therefore your
product. Your users just happen to work at the same company as you. As
well, again, big tech is an extremely rare situation where you are
floating on a bed of money generated by one of the most ridiculously
effective economic engines to ever exist. If your company makes
hundreds of billions of dollars, yes, you can write your own
dependencies.

Of course, this is not to say that you should never write
dependencies. Sometimes you do in fact have a need that is not
fulfilled by any libraries. But the calculus in your mind should be
that the writing of the dependency is a loss. It is a loss of
developer time, of future maintenance, of mental mindshare. What do
you get back? If it's the ability to write a feature that your users
need, then yeah, that's probably a good tradeoff. But if it's some
aesthetic belief around minimal dependencies, if it's a few megabytes
of binary size, if it's a hypothetical issue that only arises once you
have a bajillion users, well, then you are wasting your time.
