---
title: "All in the Game"
date: 2023-08-23T13:24:24-04:00
draft: false
---

In so many of my conversations around career stuff, I reference
"knowing how to play the game". I've never thought to explain what
exactly "the game" is, because when you've become acclimated, it's
just obvious, self-evident even. And no, this is not anything close to
The Wire, so apologies if you expected me to talk about drug dealing.

The game consists of figuring out any possible way to increase your
resume to appear as impressive as possible. Usually so you can get
into college/jobs/startups/anything of prestige. This can involve
stretching truths, collecting extracurriculars, all the way up to
straight up lying.

I'll preface this by emphasizing that I do not condone this
behavior. I can have some sympathy as to why people play the
game---immense financial reward that lifts them and their family from
poverty---but I don't think it's fundamentally acceptable. Of course,
this is on a spectrum, and some twisting of the truth on a resume i
not exactly a mortal sin.

Let's give some examples. You are a part of your college's tech
club. You show up to a couple meetings, maybe contribute one or two
lines of code. You could list that on your resume as a member, or even
omit it entirely since it's really not that substantial. Or...you
could claim to be a vice president[^1] who wrote a codebase from
scratch and deployed it. Who will know the difference? It's not like
jobs will do a background check on a club membership.

[^1]: There's always a dozen vice presidents of clubs

Or maybe you win a hackathon with a project that sounds really
impressive like categorizing traffic patterns using machine learning,
or building an augmented reality translation app, but are in fact
basic tutorials on the internet.

Or say you did an internship at Google, then when you create your
startup, you tell people that you're an ex-Googler. I mean, sure, you
are, but an internship is not the same as a 5 year stint. And of
course on your resume you emphasize that you were using *Big Data*
with terabytes of processing, i.e. you plugged stuff into a BigQuery
table.

This compounds really quickly! Those last three examples could be in
order. And they could in fact be preceeded by another few, say a
carefully crafted lies to look extra good on your college application,
and succeeded by a few, say a startup with an overly ambitious conceit
to get on Forbes' 30 under 30.

I don't mean to say that someone who does these things is not
talented, smart, hardworking, etc. They very well could be. *Could* is
the relevant word here. If you know how to play the game, your actual
abilities are almost irrelevant[^2] here. You could be a programming
genius and a total mediocre coder and get pretty much the same
outcome.

[^2]: Playing the game plus some leetcode skills is probably enough
    for a really good career in software development.

If you want a perfect example of students playing the game, go to a
hackathon. Students at hackathons have perfected the art of sounding
impressive while accomplishing very little. They are masters at
pitching these products that sound like they're going to change the
world, that get the inevitably naive, non-technical judges to think,
"wow, these kids are geniuses!", all the while having spliced together
a pretty graphic and a front-end.

That may be a little too jaded. A lot of these people mean well and do
eventually harness that energy into doing cool stuff. And it is worth
emphasizing that a lot of people play this game so they can attain
financial stability for their family, or so that they can gain
prestige that they've been told for their entire life to crave.

And yes, prestige is a major factor here. Often times the prestige
part starts out as a means towards an end. Get into Stuyvesant so you
can go to MIT, so you can get into Jane Street. But it's far too easy
to end up chasing prestige for the sake of prestige. I've fallen into
this trap where I've thought about doing something, say applying for a
job or going to graduate school, just so I can have a "name" on my
resume. Would that name make me happy? Would it provide much more than
my already very good career? Probably not. But dammit it's tempting.

This isn't limited to tech, naturally. I wouldn't be surprised if a
lot of students aspire towards law, medicine, or business simply
because of prestige. After all, prestige is an easy target. You get
praise, money, without having to think about your actual path,
i.e. what will make you happy, what will lead to a fulfilling
life. It's easier to just check a box on a list of accomplishments as
a proxy.

This is getting a little too existential, so let's go back to
practicalities. I'm writing this blog post because as much as I
dislike the game, I do think it's worth understanding how people play
it. First, because with that understanding, you can apply the
techniques if you wish. I don't condone straight up lying or cheating,
but I do think some more bold, self-aggrandizing language on one's
resume is acceptable. Or maybe understanding what projects sound
impressive and seeking those out. But second and more importantly, you
can see through people trying to play the game.

The other day, I was looking at someone's portfolio site, which at
first glance, seemed incredible. They had a portfolio project from two
FAANG companies as well as another Fortune 500 company. All with these
beautiful breakdowns that explained how they lead these various
projects. And they were only a rising junior in college. Wow!

Except, if you looked closely, you realized that one was an internship
project, one was a project for a student organization that
collaborated with a big tech company, and the Fortune 500 one was
another intern project. Breaking that down to the core elements, this
person did an internship at a Fortune 500 company and another one at a
big tech, while doing some extracurriculars at college. That's still
very impressive! I don't want to belittle their accomplishments, but
it is a lot more down to earth than their website may have portrayed.

What I took away from their site is that they were a reasonably
accomplished student, and absolutely excellent at promoting
themselves. What a lot of people may take away from the site is that
this person is a wunderkind genius who will create the next
Facebook. And that very well could be their eventual path. After all,
if they can convince more than a few people that they are indeed this
talented, they will receive access to far more resources and
opportunities.

Anyways, what's tricky about this situation is that it's so easy for
someone to look at this portfolio, believe the self-promotion, and end
up discouraged since clearly *this* person is so much better than
them. What they don't understand is that this person is playing a
completely different game. It's like if you were playing basketball
using the [strict rules from the
1960's](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6IPXSqOhykg) and I was playing
with the looser rules of the modern era. I may be scoring 30 points a
game with *fundamentally different rules*.

And of course this is further compounded with background and
privilege. If you're struggling to feel like you belong in tech,
seeing these exaggerated portfolios will only make you even more
discouraged. Not to mention, knowledge of the game is extremely
connected to privilege. The people who know these tricks are often the
privileged, whether it's the wealthy who can afford to play the
college admissions game of buying extracurriculars, or the students at
elite schools who gain access to social and cultural knowledge, even
if they're not rich themselves.

I went to a high school where most students were playing the game. It
was almost a surprise when I reached college and realized most
students didn't have a resume and weren't applying to internships in
the fall of their freshman year, and weren't doing side projects and
weren't pitching hackathon projects. Talk about a bubble.

But of course, at the end of the day, game, no game, you have to ask
yourself the same question: [Do you like the
work?](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/05/14/do-you-like-it.html). Because
if you don't, no matter how much prestige you accumulate, you're still
going to be spending your days doing the work.
