---
title: "Alternate Hiring Strategies"
date: 2022-07-28T00:12:48-04:00
draft: true
---

I'm not claiming all of these will work, but they're worth a shot:

## Gap Year Internship

There's plenty of really bright high school students who you could
hire pretty easily. They'd be really cheap to hire, scrappy, and if
they're looking for internships as a high schooler, they're probably
going to be better than a lot of college students. In fact, if you can
keep them coming back every summer during college, by the time they
graduate, they'll be pretty damn impressive.

Of course, you're going to select people who already know programming
and who have the support system to take gap years and apply to
internships. That will mean this population is likely biased towards
overrepresented communities.

## Go To Underrepresented Communities

Speaking of diversity, I'm always amazed when people pay lip service
to diversity, keep on hiring as they always have, then throw their
hands up in the air and claim there aren't any good candidates from
underrepresented backgrounds.

Are there companies that do a circuit of HBCUs? Or woman's colleges?
You could also connect with programs that explicitly try to teach
underrepresented people. It'd be interesting to see what other
venues you could find.

## Last Minute Hiring Cycle

New graduate and internship roles operate on hiring cycles. These days
they start in mid-summer and go until about early spring. If you miss
this window, too bad. You could be the greatest candidate alive but
many companies won't hire you.

Why not reserve a few spots for last minute applications? So many
brilliant programmers hate applying for jobs and will procrastinate it
endlessly. Applying early has nothing to do with how good an applicant
is.

## Dig Into Foreign Language Communities

There's an incredible trove of Japanese programmers doing cool systems
stuff. Some of them are barely out of high school! The only issue is
that most of their documentation and personal websites are in
Japanese. Fortunately Google Translate works pretty well.

I wouldn't be surprised if there's similar communities in other countries.

## Ask Professors

Apparently Fog Creek did this/does this? I've never heard of anybody
else doing it, but it makes sense. Especially if you want to do
something really innovative technically in a space, you might be able
to poach a couple graduate students looking to get out of academia.

## Use The Data

I've found so many promising people just by browsing through GitHub. I
bet if you did some proper queries using the API, maybe a web crawler,
you could amass a really solid list of candidates. Add on a Twitter
search for keywords like "compiler, llvm, io_uring, L1 cache" and
you'd get some cool people.

## Pre-empting

Create a deal where if a developer gets to the final round with
certain companies, you'll give them a blazing fast process. You should
already have a super fast process, but I'm talking reach out on
Monday, offer by Friday. However you do have to trust that these
companies have good processes. I wouldn't do this with say, Google for
instance.


## Allow Unconventional Applications

Some companies have a catch-all email address for candidates who don't
fit a specific job. That's great but it's still too daunting for a lot
of people. Maybe there can be a wildcard application, or even just one
single application that doesn't hold any requirements. This sounds
crazy but job requirements have been shown to discourage qualified
underrepresented candidates. Why not take it to an extreme and remove
them all? If a person is good but not in the way you imagined, why not
take them still?
