---
title: "Let Interns Apply Late"
date: 2021-11-15T17:33:16-05:00
draft: false
---

Why do companies punish applying late? If a student dares to start
their intern application process in January or February, they're met
with a wall of "Sorry, we've finished our intern hiring process for
the year". Why is that? It's not like earliness beyond all
reasonableness is an inherently good quality. Plenty of great
applicants apply late, whether due to exigent circumstances (*cough*
COVID *cough*), ignorance of timescales, or laziness.

Yes, yes, the early bird gets the worm, fortune favors the prepared, I
know the aphorisms. But plenty of brilliant, hard working programmers
are lazy about recruiting. That shouldn't rule them out for
jobs.

Internship recruiting gets earlier every year because companies keep
racing to scoop up the same pool of talented interns. If Microsoft
hires their interns in October, then Amazon can scoop up a few who
would have gone to Microsoft by hiring in September.

But why keep desperately raising the stakes for the same pool of
interns? It's not the only source. For every intern who starts
preparing their spreadsheet of applications in July, there's
multitudes who don't even think about internships until winter break.

Indeed this knowledge about recruiting cycles and early-ism---as I'm
deciding to call it---is restricted to those who inhabit certain
circles, whether that be prestigious schools, online communities such
as /r/csMajors or just an ambitious friend group. If you exit those
spheres, you realize how few people are actually even contenders for
these jobs.

But what drives recruiters to blindly insist on recruiting earlier and
earlier, instead of sitting down and questioning the beliefs that
drive them to these ridiculous conclusions?

I suppose there's the common problem of inertia. This is the way it's
always been done. But ascribing too much to inertia is being
uncharitable to recruiters. There's understandable reasons why
recruiters insist on earliness. A recruiter's job is to hire good
programmers. From the perspective of a recruiter, there's a pool of
applicants and since every company is taking from the same applicant
pool, it makes sense to arrive early to get the best applicants.

That's what I'd term a *local solution*. It solves the problem in the
local, immediate sense. Need better candidates? Start recruiting
earlier. You cut yourself? Get a band-aid.

But this isn't the only way to solve a problem. Local solutions don't
scale and often miss the true issue at hand. You can keep recruiting
earlier, but eventually it'll get ridiculous. If you keep on cutting
yourself, you don't put on more band-aids; you examine how you're
using the knife.

Instead, let's try to find non-local solutions. Let's not try to get
more applicants from the current applicant pool. How about we find
other applicant pools? If I were a recruiter for a moderately large
company, I'd have two rounds of recruiting. I'd have the traditional
recruiting round that gets earlier every year. Perhaps by 2030 it'll
be right after high school graduation. I'd also have a recruiting
round right before the internship, perhaps from March to May. Maybe
even June.

By that late, we've exhausted the typical applicant pool. However this
does not imply that we've exhausted all potential applicants. Far from
it, we'd probably get a remarkable applicant pool. We'd get the crazy
ones, the misfits[^1], the people who didn't or couldn't apply
earlier. Cloudflare is a great example of a company that hires
late. They even expanded their intern class due to COVID. I hope other
companies follow in their footsteps.

[^1]: The people who (mis)quote Steve Jobs
