---
title: "Art School for Programmers"
date: 2022-07-27T17:32:12-04:00
draft: false
---

What if we made art schools but for programming?

Let's back up. I would like to remake the way we teach programmers. I
just don't think a CS degree with lectures, homework and tests works
well for teaching people how to program. I don't think I'm alone
here. Many programmers chafe under this traditional structure. They
skip class; they get poor grades; they drop out.

This is where the pedantic peanut gallery points out that CS is not
programming. Sure: It isn't. But what if school focused on
programming? What if we made it the priority?

Buried in the whole CS is not programming rhetoric is the implicit
notion that programming is a small, insignificant enough topic that it
is not worth a course of study. CS is not programming because CS is
the real area of study while programming is the superficial nonsense
that is not important. I don't agree. Programming is a very deep field
with a lot of fundamental aspects to it. There is a level of craft
that we could be teaching in school that we are not. Far too many
students leave their CS degree not knowing the first thing about how
to program well.

I don't mean to say that computer science should be excluded. Computer
science is absolutely essential to programming. But I think it's
perfectly okay to put programming first. Much like physics is
absolutely essential to an engineering degree, yet we don't expect all
engineers to major in physics.

Okay, what should a programming curriculum be? One source of
inspiration is art school. I was never the art school type, but having
talked to people who have gone, I've gotten a little jealous hearing
about their experiences. What stuck out to me was how the culture was
so focused around creation. People would create and revel in their
creation. Their work didn't always have to be the greatest, although
there was a habit of critiquing and paying attention to
technique. There was a sense of pride and ownership in this work; it
wasn't just perfunctory homework or a fill in the blank project. It
was a reflection of their value as an artist.

I don't see why there can't be a programming school like art
school. In a way, a lot of programmers are like artists. They build
their own creations with their own style. They have a vision that they
execute. They use creativity.

How could we transform the art school format into programming?

I'd keep a lot of the same classes, but change up the format. Instead
of lectures, a course would be focused on implementation. Many courses
would involve a single long term project. Sometimes these projects
will be group projects, other times they'd be individual
projects. There would be a focus on using professional techniques like
code review, testing, continuous integration. Classes would teach
programming languages spanning multiple paradigms like functional,
imperative, logic, etc.

There should also be classes on other things that we don't teach yet
are essential to being a good programmer. Knowing how to structure and
organize your data is absolutely crucial for performance, readability
and reliability. A traditional CS data structures course will teach
you that an array is better than a linked list for indexing. It won't
teach you where to put that array in your code or when you may want to
combine it with another array. I'd also love a class on
correctness. It'd go over all the different ways you can validate your
code, whether that's types, tests, invariants, etc.

I'd also let people take time to just create. That could be an amazing
gift of its own. Imagine if you had time to just work on a project for
six months. Not a startup, no. Just any cool project. With advisors
and potential collaborators too!

Who should be the teachers? Ideally they should be programmers too. CS
professors can range from hard core programmers to people who haven't
touched code in years. In a programming school almost[^1] every teacher should
code. Ideally they should code pretty often. That is a demanding ask
considering teaching is a pretty hard job too, but perhaps it could be
in service of teaching. If the teachers build tools for teaching, they
could in turn make their teaching load a little lighter.

[^1]: I could see a teacher responsible for algorithms or introductory
    math not needing to know how to code, but it might help for even
    those positions.

Art schools also recruit working, successful artists to give talks or
for residencies. Let's do the same. Imagine if a school could get
people like Andreas Kling or Niko Matsakis to be around students, to
even teach students. That'd be so cool! It's so odd that in a CS
program we're restricted to people who endured the hellish grind that
is academia, or people who will endure the hellish grind that is being
an adjunct.

If we could provide students with 4 years of instruction, mentorship,
and practice time, I truly believe we could produce some of the
greatest programmers on Earth. There's that whole concept of a 10x
programmer. I don't know if it's 10x, but there are certainly
programmers who are far better than others. Partially that's
intelligence and dedication, sure. But it's also education and
practice. 10x programmers have the time and resources to become these
phenoms. What if we made those two aspects available to more people?

And then take it a step further. What if we had all of these budding
10x programmers, but now they're in the same classroom? What if
they're collaborating on projects and debating Rust vs Zig in the
hallways? What could come out of this?

I'd love to see.
