---
title: "Avoid Provinciality"
date: 2022-02-06T11:26:46Z
draft: true
---

I'm a habitual advice giver, warranted, qualified or not. In the
process of giving advice, I've noticed this recurring thread. I've
struggled to nail it down, but I finally have. It's the concept of
*provinciality*. Provinciality is the act of being in a small
pond. It's more than that though. It's a certain close-mindedness that
comes with this small pond. Let me explain further.

I used to fence, epee specifically. In the fencing world there'd be a
common occurance where someone would post about their fencing coach in
some small club. Their coach would always have some weird, antiquated
belief system, usually based around the idea that fencing is this
graceful, sport for gentlemen where students need to be trained in the
right fashion. Which, by the way, is some rather dog-whistle racism
crap. The extreme of these people would be the classical fencers, but
that's worth an entire rant. Anyways, this coach would impart
these beliefs on their students, stuff like screaming after a point
being "unsportsmanlike", or having to learn foil, a different weapon,
before epee. The moment these people would ask about their coach
online, they would quickly learn that their coach is extremely unusual
and old fashioned.

How'd their coach get away with this? To quote Seinfeld, they were the
master of their own domain. They controlled the small pond of their
fencing club. They also kept away outside influences. These coaches
would almost never have their students compete. Or if they did, they'd
figure out some reason why their students didn't do well. Oh the
referees are poorly trained. Or oh at a low level brute force wins but
at a higher level you need the classical technique and perfect
ballestras of a gentleman.

It also helps that students buy into [the Karate Kid
myth](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/10/20/the-karate-kid-is-bullshit.html)
that a mysterious lone mentor is better than an actively competitive
dojo, that weird exercises are better than straighforward
sparring. This is nonsense. Cobra Kai had some horrible ethics but
they're undoubtedly the better dojo if you want to win.

That isn't to say all lone coaches are bad. I had a wonderful fencing
coach who taught at a smaller club. But a bigger pond is almost always
an opportunity for better competition and better improvement.

This applies to fencing; it also applies to many other situations. For
instance, small tech companies. There are many excellent small tech
companies (I work at one!). But there is a massive massive difference
between a small tech company where everybody has a varied work
experience including some time in big tech, and a small tech company
where everybody has a very limited work experience and nobody's worked
at a big tech company.

I don't mean to lionize big tech. There's certainly a lot of
incompetence and poor engineering at big tech companies. But it's a
little harder to go to a big tech company and come out provincial. You
inevitably encounter really good engineers and really great
engineering practices *somewhere* in the organization, even if it's
not your team. Contrast that with a small company, where you can go
your entire time without seeing someone properly review a pull request
or set up proper tooling/testing.

I had an experience with a provincial company. It's worth an entire
blog post, however in short, the company was bootstrapped by a bunch
of college graduates who had little to no professional software
development experience, and who hired others with limited experience
(including me, the lowly intern). The result was a company with no
programming standards, a horrible case of [magpie
development](https://blog.codinghorror.com/the-magpie-developer/) and
[expert
beginners](https://daedtech.com/how-developers-stop-learning-rise-of-the-expert-beginner/). The
codebase was an absolute mess; the culture was to ship as fast as
possible; the programming team was utterly beholden to the product
managers and the marketing team. It was a mess.

The worst part about being in such a company is that the experience
becomes normalized. You just see software development as this
horrible, cargo cult experience. I remember talking with one of my
coworkers and him explaining to me that this is just how software
development is, you need to hit your deliverables. The only reason I
didn't agree was due to my prior experience at a far better run small
company. Even then, I remember going to a big tech company and being
utterly amazed at how much better it was. There was no fire and
fury. There was no micromanaging boss breathing down my neck. There
was no incompetent CTO making arbitrary decisions on the fly.

One final experience with provinciality comes from academia. I'll
admit that I have not experienced this first-hand. In
academia---specifically math and computer science---provinciality can
be rather challenging to determine because professors by their very
nature are isolated in very specific subfields. That doesn't mean
they're provincial per se, nonetheless it can be easy to confuse the
two.

In this case, provinciality can come with age. Professors who are
still tenure-track and not tenured need to prove their research again
and again. They have to hustle to get grants, to get papers accepted,
etc. Professors who are tenured do not have to do this. Professors who
are tenured and close to retirement especially do not have to do
this. Therefore, it can be a little dangerous getting advice from an
older professor close to retirement. The unfortunate truth is that
many times, a subfield dies with a professor. A professor may push
their student into doing work that is no longer popular, and therefore
has extremely limited career prospects. Even worse, they can
discourage their students from pursuing other, more fruitful
areas. There's an old adage that if a respected elder in a field says
that something can be accomplished, it almost surely will be. If they
say it is impossible, then it definitely will be accomplished!

I'm not saying to avoid elderly professors. They're often wonderful
people who can teach you multitudes. It's just better at times to seek
out advice from more than just elderly professors. Conferences are a
great way to get a feel for the larger academic world.

Which brings me to my advice on how to avoid provinciality. First,
seek out information beyond your environment. Read online, find books,
watch videos. Second, listen to your coach, your manager, your
professor, but do not take their word as the ultimate truth. If they
say something cannot be done or should not be done, ask them
why. Third, change your environment. I'm not saying you always need to
fence at the biggest club, or always go to a large company, but even a
little bit of experience can disabuse you of certain provincial
notions.

Really, provinciality is about mastery. People who practice
provinciality consider themselves masters and therefore refuse to
change or ammend their worldview. In my view, that's not mastery, but
instead dogma. Real mastery always strives to learn more and adapt to
new knowledge.
