---
title: "Chili Oil Notes Part 2"
date: 2023-09-16T01:18:43-04:00
draft: false
---

# Resources

Here's a list of resources for chili oil. As a whole, it's pretty
remarkable how much more sophisticated the Chinese videos are for
chili oil. They tend to have a lot more thought around infusion and
chili processing. Most of the Western videos are quite terrible and
similar. Only a few really bother to add spices, put good quality
peppers, and do some careful infusion.

- [1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PfFNXX_BMHo): An interesting
  take by a Chinese chef. Uses the multiple infusion technique where a
  hot first infusion "is for spice", and then subsequent infusions are
  for flavor. Uses a combination of chili flakes, chili powder, and
  hand ground chilies. The video does claim that adding spices lessens
  the chili flavor.

- [2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo0aGgCuvH4): Probably one of
  the best Chinese videos on chili oil by Chef Wang Gang. Similar
  technique to above with an interesting wrinkle of adding baijiu,
  supposedly to avoid burning the chilies. I wonder if it adds to
  flavor extraction too. Also lots of interesting spices and herbs
  added.

- [3](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FpgawC2FKp4): Another Wang Gang
  video. I don't like douchi in chili oil, but this one is interesting
  for the step where the spices are soaked in baijiu to extract
  flavor.

- [4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GezQyVRQRzU): Still my go-to
  recipe for a chili crisp. Sohla does a great job of adding a balance
  of flavors with additions like mushroom powder, MSG, sugar, and a
  whole bunch of spices. The single hot flash does the trick and the
  sugar offsets any potential bitterness. Fantastic recipe.

- [5](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uZJtOATAZl4): This is a really
  interesting idea of using clarified butter to make an oil with a
  fairly standard slow infusion process, then blending it with toasted
  milk powder to make essentially brown butter. Kathy seems to blend
  all of the aromatics too (I think?) which is interesting. She then
  whips it up into a compound butter, kinda close to beef fat hot pot
  base. I'd love to try this although the clarified butter does make a
  more expensive oil.

- [6](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ddDwArEqeDQ)


# Updated Thoughts

## Infusion

I'm fairly sold on the multiple hot flashes for infusion. You start
with a very hot flash at 375F (190C) with some of the oil, then add
the remainder of the oil at 280F (140C). It helps to do the hot flash
with only half the chilies and then mix in the rest. I suppose you
could also try mixing a hot flash and a slow infusion, but that seems
like more work.

A really key insight that I learned was to add the sichuan peppercorns
*last* when the oil is at 212F (100C). Turns out their flavor doesn't
stand up to the heat. I have noticed that the tingly flavor was
lacking in my earlier batches, so this is a good tip.

I got around to getting a sous vide machine again, so I'll do an
experiment with that. I bet that could add a really nice layered
effect.

## Chili Mixture

In the videos I watched, I noticed that they were using a combination
of chili powder and chili flakes. This goes against my coffee
metaphor, but likely that's an issue with my metaphor and not with
their technique. I made a batch of oil with this combo of gochugaru
and chili flakes. It turned out pretty fantastic, so I'll have to do
more experiments here. I wouldn't be surprised if a lot of the flavor
is coming from the powder since it's so fine.

I do wonder if you could split infusion temps by chili size. Maybe the
powder is at a higher risk of burning?

