---
title: "How to Olympian"
date: 2022-08-17T10:33:58-04:00
draft: true
---

Let's say you want to become an Olympian. How can you do it? I don't
know in general, but I have a pretty good idea for fencing. Of course
this is assuming you are American.

0. Family

Ideally be born into a family of fencers who have enough money to
support you, i.e. a few million dollars. Bonus points if you have a
sibling who is near your age and also interested in fencing.

1. Start Early

Do sports from a very young age, whether that's swimming, basketball,
tag, etc. Try to start fencing at 8-10 years old. At the very latest,
12-14 years old. You should start going to tournaments when
you're 10.

2. Gain Athleticism

Start weight training when you're 14-15. Fencing is an athletic sport,
but it's also a fairly small sport. Therefore with proper training and
some natural talent, you should be able to get to the top tier of
athleticism in fencing. Contrast that with basketball where even if
you are a fantastic player, you need to be at least 6'2" (unless
you're IT or Muggsy).

That said it doesn't hurt to be tall so make sure to get enough sleep
and eat your vegetables.

3. Location

You should probably be in New York. Other possible locations include
Los Angeles, San Francisco or New Jersey.

Alternatively you could spend a few years in Europe training and doing
the world cup circuit.

4. Coach and Club

Get a good coach and club. Ideally the coach should have a track
record of producing extremely good fencers, i.e. national team members
and Olympians. The coach should also be attached to a club that has a
group of these extremely good fencers. You should train there as early
as possible.

5. High School

When you go to high school, do not go to a super challenging, intense
school. Go somewhere good, but not elite. A second or third tier
private school in New York is a good bet. Try to have the school close
to your fencing club. Do not fence for the school's team.

Accept that you will get middling grades. A B or even C+ average is
fine.

Try to compete a lot. Go to a tournament every weekend and all the
possible national events (NACs). If you get high enough on the Junior
and Cadet points lists, go to international tournaments too.

Train in fencing 3-4 times a week. This is actually less than what a
lot of coaches recommend, but I'd prioritize physical development over
fencing at this stage. It's far more important that you become a well
balanced, healthy adult athlete. Instead do lots of conditioning and
cross training.

6. College

Go to a college that is near your home. That way you can continue to
train at your club with your coach. Many fencers decline in their
ability when they leave for college because they no longer have their
coach around. In New York that'd be Columbia or St John's.

NCAA fencing is a mixed bag. Do it if you want, but don't feel guilty
about taking a year off to train for the Olympics. Recruitment is a
good plan for getting into school.

7. Olympic Qualification

College is probably the first chance you'll have to make an
Olympics. Olympic qualification math is tricky and depends on whether
the US team qualifies for a given weapon/gender combo. If the team for
your gender/weapon is strong, your best bet is to get on the team, as
the entire team will go to the Olympics. If the team is not strong,
you need to qualify individually. That means you need to be pretty
high up on international points as an individual, or you need to win a
zonal competition. You should probably take off a year if this your
strategy as you'll need to spend that year doing World Cups and
training for Zonals.

8. International Tournaments

International tournaments tend to be a lot different than domestic
ones. You'll need to get used to them which takes time. Also it helps
to arrive at the location a couple weeks in advance to acclimate to
time zone, weather, air quality, etc. Because of that, doing an
international tournament circuit "right" almost always involves a full
time commitment.

9. After College

Hopefully you've at least done an Olympic qualification cycle by the
time you've graduated college.
