---
title: "How to Judge CS Programs"
date: 2021-12-27T00:02:21-05:00
draft: true
---

You're a high school student who is interested in computer
science. Maybe you've done some programming already. Maybe you've
taken a couple classes at your high school. Maybe you're a total
beginner[^1]. How do you judge CS programs?

[^1]: If you're a CS prodigy with IOI medals and high school tech
    internships, the answer to this post is easy: go to MIT, CMU, or
    Stanford.

## Why Are You Qualified?

In short, I'm not. This is equally a rumination on CS program quality
as much as a prescriptive guide.

The long answer is that I've spent a lot of time[^2] thinking about
undergraduate CS program quality because I went to a program that
appears prestigious on paper but was, in my opinion, on par with a CS
program at a low tier liberal arts college. You can read my thoughts
[here](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/11/12/goto-nyu-cs-considered-harmful.html)
and
[here](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/12/10/intellectual-ambition.html). I've
spent time going to other school's hackathons, talking to students at
other schools, reading through the degree requirements of various CS
program and generally doing my homework.

[^2]: Well, okay, 5 years

If you'd like to give a rebuttal, I'd love to hear it! Heck, I'll
publish it here as long as you're not unneccessarily mean.

## How Not To Do It

Here's how to **not** do it. Do not go off of ranking. Not US News &
World, not even the wonderful
[CSRankings.org](http://csrankings.org/). Ranking does not relate to
undergraduate experience in any realistic fashion. Generally ranking
measures the status of the university as a research institution. Even
then, in the case of US News & World, these rankings are not well
loved among professors. I'd ignore them almost completely.

Do not go off of prestige signifiers such as Ivy League or admission
rate. These can indicate a general amount of funding or student
quality, but beyond that there is nothing about Ivy Leagues that makes
them inherently good at computer science.

Do not look up very famous professors and think "oh I'm gonna work
with them". As great of a fantasy as it is, working with Yann LeCun at
NYU is pretty unlikely. I get that a common admissions strategy is
"demonstrating interest", but Googling professors is not that much
demonstration.

## What Do You Want?

For a lot of students, this answer is approximately the same. They
want a CS program that gives them a good, thorough education that
provides them the skills they need to get a job as a programmer. With
this comes other requirements such as a good community of students who
are smart and helpful; professors who can teach well; decent resources
for job searching and extracurriculars. I'm generally going to assume
you're in this category for the rest of the post.

There's a few other categories. There's the future academic. They want
to go into academia and become a professor. If you have somehow
decided on this as a career in high school, then I am extremely
impressed. In which case, I'd recommend looking at
[CSRankings.org](http://csrankings.org/) and reading the [advice for
applying to graduate school
page](http://csrankings.org/advice.html). You're not going to be
applying to graduate school just yet, but this advice will influence
where you'd want to go for undergrad. If you've managed to even figure
out a domain of research (wow!), then of course you can filter by that
domain in CSRankings.org.

I will caution that you may believe in your heart of hearts that this
is your preordained path, but stuff changes and what may have seemed
so certain in high school, may not be so in college. It's still good
to follow the rest of the advice, just in case you end up not going
down the academic path.

The other category is the entrepreneur. I'm not 100% sure what is the
best combo for entrepreneurs. I will say that a good community seems
essential, as finding good co-founders seems to be an essential part
of being an entrepreneur. Otherwise the advice should be similar;
you'll need to be a decent programmer either way.

## Signs Of A Good Program

Now I'm gonna list various signs that I've noticed tend to imply a
good CS program. These signs are not always a direct
correlation. They're also very subjective to my interests and my
beliefs in what makes a CS program good.

Take a look at their intro to programming. Is it a perfunctory
Java/Python tutorial that you can skip with AP credit? Or is it
something deeper? Does the course encourage you to think about program
design and computation at a deep level? Does it use a book like [How
To Design Programs](https://htdp.org/) or [Structure and
Interpretation of Computer
Programs](https://mitpress.mit.edu/sites/default/files/sicp/index.html). Does
it use an off-kilter language like Haskell or Lisp? This is a sign
that someone put a little thought into the CS program.

What do their clubs and extracurriculars look like? Do they have up to
date websites? Are there projects listed on a GitHub organization? Are
these projects active? How many events do they run?

Is there a piece of student written software in common use at the
school? Something like [YACS](https://yacs.cs.rpi.edu/) goes a long
way in demonstrating a healthy community.

Is their curriculum thorough? Do they teach classes on systems level
programming, operating systems, compilers, databases, theoretical
computer science, programming languages, distributed systems,
functional programming, cybersecurity, and machine learning? One fact
that shocks most programmers is that my school does not have an
undergraduate compilers course.

Find a course website (at least a few professors have public
ones). Compare it to another school's course site. Are similar topics
covered? Does one school cover noticably less ground? Are the
assignments based around **programming**? If not programming, are they
at least based around solving difficult problems?

## Programming, Yes Programming

Whenever I emphasize programming, I inevitably get the same tired
response of "Buuuuut CS iS NoT ProGraMmIng". And yes, reducing down
computer science to the act of programming is like reducing down
literature to the act of writing news articles. But if hundreds of
thousands of companies were clamoring for journalists and these jobs
paid six figures easily and 99% of people who enter a literature
program intended on becoming journalists, you'd be forgiven for
confusing the two as an undergraduate.

And indeed, yes, I will say that effectively, for 99% of
undergraduates, computer science is programming. If you respond to the
contrary, you are being a pedantic jerk. That isn't to say that the
non-programming aspects of computer science are bad. It's just that
they're less important to your average undergrad.

## Hackathons

For a while, I used hackathons as a sign. If your school runs a good
hackathon, it probably means it's a good CS program. Now, hackathons
are a little pass√©, what with the pandemic and just general
decline. But back in the day, if a school had a hackathon that
attracted a lot of students, had good sponsors and good prizes, and
was decently well run, that would be a good sign.

If a lot of students show up to hackathons, that's also a good sign. I
clued into University of Waterloo being quite good when I noticed all
the damn Waterloo students winning all the damn hackathons.

Of course now that's all a little dated. I'd be curious to know if
there's a similar event out there.

## Signs Of A Bad Program

Obviously the inverse of the good signs. Intro class is perfunctory
Java/Python tutorial; limited course selection; insipid
clubs/extracurriculars.

Ironically, a school's general prestige can be a bad sign. For
instance, my school is a fairly prestigious school. It's not an Ivy
but it's good enough that it took a little effort to get
admitted. However, it is not a school that is well known for computer
science. Therefore, the students who get into my school are strong in
terms of academics, but maybe not so strong in terms of computer
science. This leads to students who are really focused on getting good
grades, but maybe not on programming or computer science as a whole.

Etch this into your brain: **grades do not make me a good programmer**.
