---
title: "How Late"
date: 2021-11-25T03:59:41-05:00
draft: true
---

What's the latest age when you can decide to pursue a career? For
sports, it's quite early. You probably can't decide to be an NBA
player after 14[^1]. For other careers it's almost unbounded. You can
publish a book in your 70's or 80's. You could learn to code in
your 80's.

[^1]: Tim Duncan *started* playing basketball when he was 14 but he's
    a big exception.

What about mathematician? After observing some friends applying to
graduate school, I'd say that, at the latest, you can be 19 when you
decide to be a mathematician, assuming you have entered college
at 18. 19 puts you at a sophomore in college. To get into graduate
school for a PhD in mathematics, you need 3 letter of recommendation
writers. At least one of these letters needs to be fairly strong. That
requires you develop an in depth relationship with a professor, which
means doing an independent study or research with them. Often times
professors will not work with any random undergraduate. They'll only
work with you if you've taken their class and sufficiently impressed
them. Indeed, if we're getting into details, you want to get rec
letters from professors who do **not** take random undergraduates, as
professors who take random undergraduates are usually too nice and
don't expect a lot of their students and therefore are, paraphrasing
Groucho Marx, running clubs that would have anybody as a member and
thus should not be your target.

Oh and you should probably be self studying mathematics, applying to
undergraduate research programs (REUs), and taking graduate level
courses.

Sure, there are examples of people who decided later. Granted they're
almost always of an older generation, or they had to go through a long
slog of getting a masters, doing unpaid research while outside of
school, and even then many of them don't end up going to great
graduate schools and don't make it to an academic position.

With CS, it seems to be a little more generous. There's less of this
pressure to do work super young and there's more competition from
industry. Industry also provides a chance to do work that's close to
research, but also pays the bills. In my view, this is a lot
healthier. You don't have this obsession with being a prodigy and you
can make some money before going into academia.

Because really, who tf decides that they're going to be a
mathematician when they're 19? You have to be either extremely
advanced and had a very enriched education; very very very naturally
talented or very misguided.
