---
title: "I Don't Know Anything, Do You?"
date: 2021-12-04T17:27:55-05:00
draft: true
---

Programming is perhaps the only field where one can be called "senior"
at the age of 25. Sure, it's just an inflated title, but the fact that
it is ever bestowed in a non-ironic fashion is remarkable. Who is
senior at the age of 25? Even if one were to have been programming
professionally from the age of 20, that's still only 5 years. Doctors
require about 10 years of education to even be considered fully
qualified. Lawyers require years of practice. In software development,
a programmer can go from intern to software developer to senior
software developer in the span of 4 years.

It's also quite noticable that the position of "junior developer" is
starting to disappear. Perhaps it's because "junior" sounds too
condescending, too naive for someone who is still a valuable
contributor. I disagree. There's no shame in accepting that you are a
beginner.

I am a beginner. I've been coding in earnest since I was 15, but let's
face it. I don't know anything. I don't mean this in an imposter
syndrome sense. In fact I'm one of the rare, privileged people who has
never had imposter syndrome. But I truly do not know anything. I claim
to have specialized in compilers, and yes, I know far more about
compilers than 95% of developers. I am still a beginner. I have not
developed any sense of mastery over my craft.

But where are the masters? Some are around and doing incredible
work. Anders Hejlsberg comes to mind. Some have been pushed out of
programming and into management by corporate structures. And some, we
may unfortunately accept, are outdated, their mastery only useful for
a different time and a different style. While some may proclaim that
software development is all the same, it is indeed quite different to
program in a low dependency, linked, no internet, no version control
fashion, versus a modern high dependency, imported, web based, version
controlled fashion.

Style, perhaps, is the crux of the issue. Is programming an inherently
stylistic field? Nobody (well, almost nobody) complains that music is
endlessly trendy and that we should all stick to the classics because
why reinvent the wheel. That's because we accept that music is a
stylistic field. You're not going to have the same style choices as
your grandmother, or your grandchildren; endless churn is a fact of
life.

Should we accept this for programming as well? If so, there is still
something to be gained by keeping around the old guard, much as we
keep around musicians like Paul McCartney or Herbie Hancock. But
seniority is often the least considered factor in evaluating
music. Nobody's choosing their music because the artist has been in
the game a long time. Programming might be the same way. Each few
years brings a new fad and a new set of hot new pop stars.

I'm not so sure. Music and programming have quite an overlap but it's
hard to accept that programming quality is as subjective as music
taste. I'd like to think there's some general skill level that masters
can improve over time.

What about apprenticeship? Should we push for an apprenticeship of
sorts for programmers? Internships are a facsimile of an
apprenticeship. They ostensibly prepare you for the work of being a
programmer by doing a project for 3 months or longer. In reality
they're rarely that good. A proper mentor/apprentice relationship
takes a lot longer to cultivate than 3 months. It also takes a lot
more attention and care than the mentor can usually provide, being
occupied with their actual job. The project can also limit learning,
as internship projects are usually explicitly designed to be easy,
isolated and not on a critical path. Often they're tooling or
developer operations related. Not bad, but not a direct preparation
for software development as a career.

The root cause of this is likely that to a lot of companies,
internships are not apprenticeships as much as long job interviews/job
advertising. They're not invested in growing the student's skills as
much as evaluating them and convincing them to join the company.

Of course, apprenticeships themselves are not perfect. The best way to
learn is to do, and too many apprenticeships fall into the trap of
having the apprentice not do. A cartoonish example, but Karate Kid is
the precise example of this issue. Why have Daniel wax a car to teach
him karate? Why not teach him karate in the first place? It makes for
a cute, memorable sequence but the more realistic scenario would be to
teach him the technique, have him practice it, then have him spar with
it as soon as possible. Using it on a car window is not the same as
using it in a fight.

Combine not doing with the standard of multiple years as an apprentice
and you end up with a rather restrictive, infeasible career
path. Companies want warm bodies and don't want to spend 3-5 years
training them, especially if they leave soon after.

This isn't a post with an answer. Career progression for developers is
very much an unsolved question. It's unsolved because neither the
companies nor the employees would want an arrangement that restricts
them. 
