---
title: "Play Yourself Into Shape"
date: 2023-04-17T22:01:53-04:00
draft: true
---

In basketball, some players will come into the season a little out of
shape. They'll get out of breath by the third quarter, maybe won't try
as hard on defense, and will generally not be as good. But then as the
season goes on, they'll play game after game and get into better
shape. Come the playoffs, they'll have rounded into great form.

This is generally considered to be bad. But, hear me out, if you're
not competing for an NBA title, the idea of playing yourself into
shape has some benefits. Namely, if you do the thing you want to get
good at, you will generally get good at it. That sounds obvious, but
it's remarkable how many people fail to follow it. If you want to get
good at writing a compiler, you should probably write a compiler. If
you want to get good at designing websites, you should design
websites. Again, pretty obvious.

But what I've noticed happens is that people get obsessed about doing
something "the right way". And they spend a lot of time researching
and thinking about how to do it "the right way". And they don't end up
doing the thing!

It's like that classic story of the pottery class where they split
into two groups: one group was to make the perfect pot, and the second
group was to make as many pots as they could. The second group ended
up making the far better pots, simply because they made more of them
and gained experience.

What's worth emphasizing in this anecdote is that the second group
probably made a lot of stinker pots. And more importantly, there
wasn't any point in romanticizing or being sentimental about these
pots. They made them and moved on.

I wish we had that mindset for software. You make stuff that sucks,
move on, and make stuff that sucks a little less. Your first compiler
will probably be terrible. But how about your second? Your third? Your
fourth? They'll each be significantly better.

Instead we're too precious about software. Perhaps it's because
software is such a complicated process, such an investment of time and
effort. Perhaps it's because programmers are eternal optimists and
believe with enough careful work, we can get it right on the first
try. Or perhaps it's because we fetishize youth and disregard
experience.
