---
title: "My Problem With Social Good"
date: 2020-04-30T18:19:36-04:00
draft: true
---

Social good is a trending term in tech these days. There are social
good hackathons, social good venture funds, blog posts espousing the
need for social good tech. Whenever I hear about these efforts, I feel
a little uncomfortable. Here's my attempt to explain why.

# As Opposed To What?

An implicit supposition in labeling certain projects as "social good"
is that other projects are therefore not about social good. Which...I
guess can be true. There are tech projects that are not necessarily
aiming at improving the world in a broader sense. But I've found that
as the scope of a project increases, the likelihood that it becomes
about social good also increases. Why is that?  If your project is
purporting to make a large impact at a global scale, it needs to be
sold as some sort of good for most people. Otherwise why would it be
adopted? You see this with big companies. Every company these days
needs to make a case for how it is improving people's lives.

I've joked that we need some social evil hackathons to counterbalance
the social good ones. How many large scale projects can you name that
do not pretend to be some sort of social good?

Therefore the term "social good" kind of gets diluted. As the TV show
Silicon Valley points out, every company wants to [make the world a
better place](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B8C5sjjhsso). How many
companies have you seen that want to make the world a worse place?

# Presumption Of Good

Which brings me to my other issue. If every large scale tech endeavor
considers themselves a force for good, how do we end up with evil
tech? As much as we'd love to imagine that the evil tech leaders of
the world are cackling in their volcano lairs, that's evidently not
the case.

My answer? They presumed they were doing good until they
weren't. Let's face it, Mark Zuckerberg didn't set out to make the
world a polarized, politically charged and unstable place. The issue I
have with labeling one's ventures as "social good" is that ultimately
you can't know if something is good until you see its effects. And
calling yourself good is a great way to blind yourself to the actual
effects of your venture. Oh sure, my app has a serious problem with
online bullying and it leaks children's data to advertisers. But I'm
still making the world a better place!

Nobody sets out to make an evil robot. Okay well [not
nobody](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z0NgUhEs1R4).

# Good For You

Another thing about social good is that it presumes a universal
objective morality. This thing that I'm doing? It's 100%, undeniably
good.

I don't agree. There's a lot of ideas that in a microcosm (perhaps
monoculture in which certain genders and races are overrepresented)
that sound great, until you talk to a person outside that
culture. [Bodega](https://techcrunch.com/2019/09/25/bodega-once-dubbed-americas-most-hated-startup-has-quietly-raised-millions/)
thought their name was a good idea. Plenty of ed-tech startups believe
that charter schools or private education is the way to go even if
they haven't stepped into a public school in 20 years (or ever).

I'm not disagreeing with products or ventures that attempt to create a
solution that the founders believe will help the world. If I did, I'd
be disagreeing with most startups. What I'm disagreeing with is the
immutability of "social good". Your impact on society and therefore
your morality is constantly in flux and therefore must be constantly
analyzed and reassessed. A few months ago it would not be a
controversial idea to hold a parade. Now it's unthinkable. Likewise
you'd have been laughed out of the room if you proposed a $1200 check
to most Americans. Now it's reality.

Of course this reassessment needs to take place in a *gasp*
intersectional context. What I mean by that is just that you need to
analyze your morality across the various combinations of gender, race,
sexuality, etc. This may seem like an impossible task, and yeah, to an
extent it is: social good is an impossible goal---an impossible goal
that we must strive towards nonetheless.

A nerdy way of putting this is that intersectionality is boolean
satisfiability. Intersectionality is the process of taking various
combinations of race, gender, sex and seeing if your idea works
through these combinations. Boolean satisifiability is the process of
taking various logical clauses and seeing if you can find an
interpretation that evaluates to true. As we know by Cook-Levin,
boolean satisfiability is NP complete[^1].

[^1]: This isn't a perfect metaphor since ideally you'd want intersectionality to be undecidable. But it's close enough

Is your startup NP complete? Have you solved P != NP? Probably
not. Although proving P = NP would be a great social evil hack, while
P != NP would maybe fall on the social good side.
