---
title: "Recruiting Anti Patterns"
date: 2022-12-14T01:19:38-05:00
draft: true
---

Please do not do any of these:

- Have a really long application with college essay prompts

- Send an email where it is not immediately clear if it's a rejection.

The amount of times I have gotten an email that's titled "Your
Application", gotten that sinking feeling in my stomach, then read a
few more lines and it's some boring "thank you for applying" or "sorry
we're taking so long" email, well that number is too damn high. Just
put [NOT A REJECTION]. It'll make my day!

- Talk at me for like 20 minutes while I nod my head off.

Yes, yes, your company is great. Y'know what's also great? Letting me
speak. I'd love to ask all sorts of questions about your company
without hearing the monologue.

- Taking forever.

Obvious but still a common sin. If you need four weeks to decide after
interviews, just reject me. I won't be offended.

- Asking for more interviews when you've already done 5+ hours of
  interview time.

Okay sometimes more interviews makes some sense. You didn't get enough
data so you want another measurement. But if you've gotten more than 5
hours of my time, you have enough data. Again, just reject me. I won't
be offended.

- Try to convince me that your $50 is more than someone else's $60.

I've had recruiters try to convince me that their offer, even though
it's 40k less than my other offer, is just a better deal because ooh
our equity is so good and their equity is so bad, and also it's about
*career growth*. Bear in mind we're not comparing equity here. We're
talking about the base cash salary. And we're not talking a public
company with a clear stock price. These are startups.

I had one recruiter, upon hearing the other offer, just laugh and tell
me to take it. They congratulated me and conceded. I have a whole lot
of respect for them and will definitely remember them and their
company going forward.

- [Not a big deal] Act all coy about "getting on a call" after my
  interviews are done.

I actually find this a little endearing, but it's always funny how
recruiters want to get on a call with me when they're clearly about to
hand out an offer. I suppose it's to avoid any potential legally
binding emails, so that makes sense.

- Tell me nothing about my potential role.

Contrary to popular belief, I don't want to work at your company
because it has a fancy name.
