---
title: "Religion in Tech"
date: 2023-03-24T16:24:11-06:00
draft: true
---

The tech community has some fascinating examples of religious
behavior. I'm not talking about developers who are Christian, Muslim,
or so on. But moreso tendencies and behavior that, when abstracted and
looked at from a more ethnographic perspective, tend to match similar
behaviors in religious communities.

# Tools For Thought

If you've waded into the waters of Hacker News or similar communities,
you've surely encountered the tools for thought movement. I'm using
"tools for thought" to encompass a few intertwined communities such as
programming languages, developer tooling, cybernetics fans, note
taking obsessives, productivity nerds, rationalists (more on them
later), and so on.

The tools for thought community is based around this idea that with
the right tools, usually some sort of note taking, personal assistant,
productivity app, programmers will unlock a significant (often order
of magnitude) increase in productivity, awareness, memory,
etc. Essentially, these tools will produce a path towards a sort of
cybernetic enlightenment.

Within this community, there are many pieces of scripture, written by
various prophets such as Warren Weaver, Vannevar Bush, Alan Kay, Andy
Matuschak, etc. Often the scripture is a description of a "lost
civilization" of sorts, a forgotten innovation (Vannevar Bush's Memex,
Alan Kay's Smalltalk) that was either too early for its time or lost
despite being the "morally correct" option. The goal for many acolytes
is to revive these forgotten innovations to bring about enlightenment.

It's worth noting that most of these prophets are white men who
operated in prestigious, intertwined circles. And indeed, the message
often preached is that of a Horatio Alger, self-improvement, salvation
through capitalism perspective. If one works hard enough and uses the
right tools, one will succeed.

# Calvinism and Protestant Work Ethic

Continuing on this thought, I've noticed a rather interesting flavor
of the classic Calvinist philosophy that shows up in tech. Calvinist
doctrine states that all people who go to heaven were predestined to
do so from their birth. Thus, the people who were predestined to go to
heaven must have been blessed by God, and therefore, would face
prosperity in their life. In short, if one is rich, they must be
predestined to go to heaven.

In tech, the predestination is not so much about being blessed, as
much as it is about being smart. Intellect is highly prized within
tech. Cults of personality are created around the supposedly smartest
of them all. Of course, intellect in this case means technical ability
first and foremost. Tech CEOs, venture capital investors, designers
all have to demonstrate their programming chops, even if it is not
relevant for their work.

This shows up in venture capital. Venture firms emphasize that they
care about the founders above all else. The founders must be smart,
techy coders. They must fit the pattern-match (note the performative
technical language) of prior icons such as the young, skinny, ingenue
(Vitalik Buterin, Patrick Collison, Bill Gates) or the charismatic
visionary businessman (Steve Jobs, Elizabeth Holmes, Adam Neumann). People
ridiculed the rather obvious posturing of Elizabeth Holmes, with the
black turtleneck, deeped voice, and emphasis on a "engineering
background" (a whole two years of college), but it worked! People
bought it.

Some may note that this concept of predestination conflicts with the
self-improvement, Horatio Alger philosophy of tools for thought. I'd
disagree, as that combination is a fundamental part of American
capitalism in the form of the Protestant work ethic. One is wealthy
and therefore blessed, because the blessed are the hard workers.

# Effective Altruism and Rationalism

I struggled for a while to categorize the Effective Altruism (EA)
movement. I found their assumption of superiority rather arrogant,
even though their actions did help people. After some time, I
realized: The EA movement is just a religion that happens to have an
emphasis on charity! From that perspective, I'm not against the
doctrine of Effective Altruism as much as the institution of EA. Do I
agree with their doctrine?  No. But I also do not agree with
Christianity and yet I am fine with a church running a soup kitchen. I
am *not* fine with the institution of the church being used to
perpetuate sexual and mental abuse, homophobia and racism.

As with any organized religion, there are abuses of power and abuses
of doctrine. In EA's case the abuses of power came in the standard
form of sexual abuse and financial fraud. The abuses of doctrine are
the focus on AI. Thought experiments on an omniscent AI destroying
humanity is no different than thought experiments around Judgement Day
or Pascal's Wager.


