---
title: "So Much Rejection"
date: 2023-08-23T00:29:04-04:00
draft: false
---

I get rejected, a lot. Whether it's for job applications, conferences,
startup accelerators, mentorship programs, universities, I have gotten
hundreds if not thousands of rejection emails.

Each time they sting a little. I'm not gonna lie. I apply to stuff
because I want to be a part of it and it sucks when that application
is denied. It's gotten easier to take rejection as I've progressed in
my career, but it still sucks.

I don't think we talk about this enough. About the sheer number of
rejections that people get, whether they're successful or not. I don't
think we normalize rejection enough.

I've applied to Jane Street maybe 10 times. I've gotten an
interview exactly twice. I've never gotten an offer.

I've applied to Y Combinator multiple times. Some applications were
more serious than others. All rejected.

Spotify, GitHub, Stripe, Amazon have never given me the time of
day. Heck, I interned at Microsoft and I get auto-rejected by a lot of
roles. And I do pretty well with job applications! I wouldn't be
surprised to see very successful people who have 10x the rejections.

Part of the issue is that people's first real experience with
rejection is with college applications. College applications are these
big one-shot systems. You spend four years[^1] preparing and get one,
maybe two tries to get into school.

[^1]: For a lot of kids it's more like 18 years.

And in that process, unless you're one of those kids who applies to
like 30 schools, you're gonna get at most a dozen rejections. Many
high achieving students get zero rejections.

Job applications are nothing like that. You can play every year for
the rest of your life. Companies encourage it! They tell you to come
back next year, email you asking you to give it another shot. Imagine
Harvard sending you an email telling you to try again. Imagine being
able to get into Stanford at 40.

That's why I liked job applications. I didn't feel like I did my
college process "properly". I wasn't prepared and didn't know how to
play the application game. And by the time I learned it, it was too
late. With jobs, I could keep playing and keep learning.

Too many people are stuck in the college application mindset. They see
a job application as a singular thing that needs to be carefully
written and revised. Which is oddly optimistic. Job applications are
very much a numbers game. Assuming you have any control over the
situation is very naive. No matter how carefully you craft your cover
letter, no matter how much prep you do, there's a chance Google's
automated system will just throw your application away or a recruiter
will just not respond. That isn't to say you should put zero effort
into applications; a well worded email goes a long way. But that
effort should be limited in scope.

People also assume that an application is a strong statement about
their ability. I've been in so many conversations where I encourage
someone to apply to XYZ place only to be told "nah man, I applied
there last year and got rejected". It doesn't help that colleges are
very good at selling college admissions as this magical process that
can pick out the wheat from the chaff. People can treat admissions as
this sacred art that is always correct.

This is a case where privilege matters a lot. If you're someone who
has privilege in the tech industry, which I do as an Asian male, you
will probably get less discouraged from a rejection. Putting it in
tech terms, you will take it as less of a signal. For many people with
privilege[^2], a rejection is just a sign that something went wrong in
the application process or the company messed up. For many people
without privilege it's a sign that they're not good enough.

[^2]: This is, of course, a very oversimplified discussion of
    privilege. In reality it's not so binary as the have and have-nots.

When I fenced competitively, there were people who were so confident
in their ability. They'd fence you, lose to you, and without losing a
beat, ask you for another round. I wasn't like that. I'd want to win
in competitions but in practice I'd take the loss. That's what
separated me from the people who got good. I didn't have that
confidence instilled into me that I could beat anyone.

Which does make me wonder, is there a way to put that confidence into
people? To set the expectations up that you will get rejected and that
rejection is not an indictment on your self. To encourage people to
celebrate and talk about rejection. To see rejection as a sign that
no, *the company* fucked up.
