---
title: "Some Startup Job Questions"
date: 2023-09-02T21:26:09-04:00
draft: true
---

If you're gonna join a startup, there are a few questions that I think
you should ask. This is by no means a comprehensive list. In fact most
of these questions are obvious, but sometimes the obvious ones are the
important ones. Also, I'm not exactly an expert on startups, these are
just based off of my limited experience.

*What does the company do?*

This is a really obvious question and yet it will reveal a lot. It'll
test whether the founders have a set vision or if they're still
figuring that out. You'll be able to see how a founder pitches. Is it
a crisp routine or a lot of "uhh, well, kinda like this". Are they talking
about what they will do in 10 years or are they talking about what
they're doing this week? Some vision is great but also concreteness is
important.

*Who are you?*

Why are these people the people who should solve this problem? A
standard adage for venture capital is that the team matters more than
the idea. Ideas can change; the team stays. Also as an employee you
are putting a lot of trust into these people. Payroll, hiring and HR
will likely be a single person. Make sure you mesh well with them. And
make sure they're reasonable, trustworthy people.

*What is your fund raising situation and burn rate?*

If the company doesn't have money, it can't pay you. You probably
shouldn't join a company that's going to go under in 6 months.

*How is the company going to make money?*

At the end of the day, a company needs to make money. Too many
founders forget that. Especially with developer tool companies, they
can focus too much on the cost centers and not on the profit centers.

*How have you validated that users want your product?*

Many founders think that you just come up with an idea, build the
product, and users will automatically like it. That's not
realistic. Startups are about validating the idea and adapting to what
users want.

*How often do you talk to users?*

You can't validate products without talking to users.

*What resources are you using to learn about doing a startup?*

Maybe this is a controversial take, but I don't think it's a bad idea
to learn about doing a startup from reading books and blog posts on
the internet. I mean sure, don't take it as gospel and don't let it
override your lived experience, but it certainly beats willful
ignorance. There is something to be said about learning from more
experienced people.

Of course, the answer could be that they've done a startup before or
were an early employee at a different startup. That's completely
valid! What is concerning is a team of people who have never done a
startup and are not attempting to learn.

*Have you shipped something to users?*

Shipping is important. Too many companies wait too long to ship.

*How much equity am I getting? How much is the strike price? How many
shares? Are they ISOs? Is there acceleration? Single trigger or double
trigger? Can I see a cap table?*

There's a lot of equity questions. I'd recommend reading a guide on
startup equity and possibly hiring a lawyer.
