---
title: "Some Startup Job Questions"
date: 2023-11-22T21:26:09-04:00
draft: false
---

If you're gonna join an early stage[^1] startup, there are a few questions
that I think you should ask the founders. This is by no means a
comprehensive list. In fact most of these questions are obvious, but
sometimes the obvious ones are the important ones. Also, I'm not
exactly an expert on startups, these are just based off of my limited
experience.

[^1]: Some of these questions apply to larger startups too, but you
    might not have the opportunity to chat with the founder before
    getting hired.

*What does the company do?*

This is a really obvious question and yet it will reveal a lot. It'll
test whether the founders have a set vision or if they're still
figuring that out. You'll be able to see how a founder pitches. Is it
a crisp routine or a lot of "uhh, well, kinda like this". Are they talking
about what they will do in 10 years or are they talking about what
they're doing this week? Some vision is great but also concreteness is
important.

*Who are you?*

Why are these people the people who should solve this problem? A
standard adage for venture capital is that the team matters more than
the idea. Ideas can change; the team stays. Also as an employee you
are putting a lot of trust into these people. Payroll, hiring and HR
will likely be a single person. Make sure you mesh well with them. And
make sure they're reasonable, trustworthy people. I would seriously
consider getting some character references if the startup is very
early stage.

Don't be fooled by accolades or previous success in non-startup
situations. Herbert Hoover was an excellent engineer and a terrible
president. Just because someone went to an Ivy League and spent 10
years at Google doesn't mean they have the ability to do a startup.

*What is your fund raising situation and burn rate?*

If the company doesn't have money, it can't pay you. The founder
should know this off the top of their head.

*How is the company going to make money?*

At the end of the day, a company needs to make money. Too many
founders forget that. Especially with developer tool companies, they
can focus too much on the cost centers and not on the profit
centers. Pay attention close attention to this part. Is it an abstract
idea that they'll get to eventually or something that they're actively
working on?

*How have you validated that users want your product?*

Many founders think that you just come up with an idea, build the
product, and users will automatically like it. That's not
realistic. Startups are about validating the idea and adapting to what
users want.

*How often do you talk to users?*

You can't validate products without talking to users.

*What resources are you using to learn about doing a startup?*

Maybe this is a controversial take, but I don't think it's a bad idea
to learn about doing a startup from reading books and blog posts on
the internet. I mean sure, don't take it as gospel and don't let it
override your lived experience, but it certainly beats willful
ignorance. There is something to be said about learning from more
experienced people.

Of course, the answer could be that they've done a startup before or
were an early employee at a different startup. That's a fantastic
answer! What is concerning is a team of people who have never done a
startup and are not attempting to learn. Willful ignorance is not a
good quality in a founder. Especially if they're from big tech, where
it's very easy to get used to floating on a bed of money generated by
the most efficient economic engines in human history.

*Have you shipped something to users?*

Shipping is important. Too many companies wait too long to ship. If
they're hiring people and haven't shipped yet, then that's a little
questionable. Do they have a specific blocker that is preventing them
from shipping?

*How much equity am I getting? How much is the strike price? How many
shares? Are they ISOs? Is there acceleration? Single trigger or double
trigger? Can I see a cap table?*

There's a lot of equity questions. I'd recommend reading a guide on
startup equity and possibly hiring a lawyer.

*What's your opinion on code quality?*

If the answer is that code quality is absolutely critical and
everything needs to be done perfectly, then I'd walk away. Code
quality is great, but you're not going to raise another round or get
customers because of code quality. It's immensely frustrating having
someone bikeshed your pull request when the company's burn rate is
ticking away.

This isn't to say that code quality should be abysmal. Some amount of
review and discipline is good. But it's secondary to shipping and
getting users.

*How comfortable are you with making mistakes in public? What was the
last public mistake that you made?*

You're gonna make mistakes at a startup. Nobody gets it right on the
first try. And these mistakes are going to be public. You'll announce
a product only for nobody to use it. You'll make a change that pisses
off some users. People on reddit or Hacker News will say you're
stupid.

If the founder is not comfortable making mistakes and being embarassed
in public, then they'll probably be a very frustrating boss. They'll
get analysis paralysis on any public facing decision. They'll be
afraid to ship. They'll be afraid to delegate. You want someone who's
willing to take risks and own their mistakes. Who's willing to empower
people even if they mess up. Failure must be an option.


# Conclusion

There are certainly many founders who probably gave incorrect answers
to these questions, learned from their mistakes and succeeded. Or
maybe they succeeded *because* they disagreed with me. I have very
little startup experience and am likely wrong in multiple places. This
list is just my set of opinions and not any sort of definitive truth.

The point here isn't that you should ask these precise
questions. Instead, you should come up with your own list based on
your own views. You should decide what are your dealbreakers for a
founder. Because once you join a startup, you are assuming a lot of
risk. You will be devoting years of your life to this cause, not to
mention a load of opportunity cost. And at the end, if everything goes
well, you'll get a financial reward, but **only if everything goes
well**.

The analogy I always use is that joining a startup is like being in a
canoe. It's a small boat, so one wrong move can capsize it. In a
canoe, you should really care about where it's going and who's
steering the boat. A large company is like a cruise ship. You're not
gonna be able to steer the cruise ship, but also it's a lot harder to
capsize. If it goes in the wrong direction for a bit, it's not the end
of the world.

If you're going to get in the canoe, you should pick your questions
and ask them.
