---
title: "Try Something"
date: 2022-09-16T01:06:54-04:00
draft: true
---

There are some snippets of conversations that stick in your brain, for
better or worse. I was talking with a co-worker at my job at an early
stage startup. He was senior to me by quite a bit, a very impressive
developer who had launched quite a few big projects. However, like me,
this was his first time doing it at a small startup, instead of a
large tech company with product market fit.

I expressed to him that since we're working at an early stage startup,
I figured that I should do some research on how to build a successful
startup. Therefore, I had been reading various books on startups, and
I really found The Mom Test to be very useful. I recommended that he
check it out.

He was probably annoyed at the insolence of a fresh out of college
developer giving him advice, reasonably so, and responded:

> I don't think reading books is how you learn to build a startup.

And yeah, he was right. Reading books is not how you learn to build a
startup. You can't just read a bunch of stuff about startups and
expect to become a startup extraordinaire.

**But** at the same time, the question is not whether reading books is
how you learn to build a startup. If I'm being honest, framing it that
way is a bit of a straw-man argument. The question is whether reading
books makes you better at founding a startup than if you didn't read
those books. Basically, is reading a net negative?

In some situations, sure. If you're in an extreme time crunch and you
need to deliver a product ASAP, you probably shouldn't be reading The
Mom Test and perusing Paul Graham's essays. But beyond that, the time
devoted to reading isn't exactly major. I'm not a fast reader and I
finished The Mom Test in a day or two.

Okay, sure, but maybe these books are giving bad advice? What if the
advice is sufficiently bad that it wrecks your startup? And again,
sure, that could be possible. I don't have any evidence to the
contrary. However let's think about the implications of that. By
saying that, you are effectively saying the following:

1. You are better off not knowing what to do and just trusting your
intuition, instead of following this book's advice.

2. If you read the book, you are incapable of determining that the
   book's advice is faulty and therefore will adopt this faulty
   advice.

These seem like pretty contradictory statements. In this model, you
are somehow good enough to have better startup strategy than someone
who has done a startup, but also somehow not a good enough judge of
startup strategy advice.

I suppose you could point out that beginner's luck is a thing, and
that people fundamentally misattribute success. Both of these are
true. The first point is not particularly effective though. While
beginner's luck is a thing, I would not count on beginner's luck. If I
was betting on who would have a better score in bowling, I would not
pick the beginner over the intermediate bowler. And like, beginner's
luck still includes instruction. It's not like you can just give
someone a bowling ball and have them figure out the rules of bowling.

Fundamental misattribution is valid, but again, the bar is not "this
book will accurately teach you how to do a startup". The bar is "this
book is a net positive for helping me do a startup". I'm not saying
this book will be accurate, just that it will give you some sort of
insight, even a small one.

Another response is that impressionable youngsters such as myself
would put too much stock in authority and would blindly apply
it. Yeah, maybe, although I was talking back to someone far more
accomplished than me. That is possible, although I don't think that
the issue is to remove knowledge. Instead, what if I read a few of
these books and started to collect the patterns? If 5 books on
startups agree about something, it might very well be true. And again,
if I'm so impressionable, I'd probably just get ideas from other
sources on startups, like pop culture or what my parents said to me.

And really, if you applied this advice to many other areas, it would
seem absurd. Nobody is out there saying "don't read books on building
houses, the best way is to build a house!" With startups they
seem so impossible, so difficult an endeavor that obviously a book
can't encapsulate how to build a startup. Which again, not the point.

It's interesting how much people dismiss research. The book's too old;
the author's startup failed anyway; we're doing things
differently. That could all be true, but it's a small cost to just
read the damn book.
