---
title: "Vetting an Early Stage Startup"
date: 2022-10-31T19:18:25-04:00
draft: true
---

Say you got an offer from this really cool sounding early stage
startup. They're working with cool tech; the co-founders are these
super smart tech whizzes; and they just raised a bunch of
money. What's not to like?

Before you take their offer, here's what I think you should try to
figure out.

# The People

Who are the founders? What have they done before? What are their main
accomplishments? Accomplishments not always interchangable. If they
were a rockstar at Google, that may mean they're fantastic at
delivering massive products for big tech, but that doesn't indicate
any competence in startups[^1].

[^1]: This is a whole other blog post, but in a gist, competency at
    big tech usually means building for millions, while competency at
	an early startup usually means building for a dozen people.

Have they done their research? Ask them for recommendations on
resources for learning about startups. If they dismiss this question,
is it because they're a seasoned serial founder who's been doing this
for years? Or is it because they don't know what they don't know?

Who are the other people at the company? Do they seem to know a lot
about startups? Are they [product minded
engineers](https://blog.pragmaticengineer.com/the-product-minded-engineer/)?
Or are they content to only focus on the tech? An early stage startup
should almost always have a lot of product minded engineers. They
should be comfortable talking to users and changing their plans
quickly. If there's no culture of talking to users, run away.

How do the engineers talk about building the product? Do they focus on
the fancy architecture, the cool programming language, the scalability
of the code? Or do they focus on fast iteration, pragmatic decisions
and shipping? These are not dichotomies but it is true that if you've
engineered your code to be this big scalable behemoth, you might not
be willing to pivot.


# The Product

What is the product? Is there evidence that people want this product?
What was the methodology for gathering this evidence? Does it follow
[The Mom Test](https://www.momtestbook.com/)? Are the founders
familiar with The Mom Test, whether in name or in function? If the
founders have validated the idea with tweets and reddit comments, then
they have not validated the idea. They have simply created the
illusion of validation.

What is the MVP of this product? How quickly can this be built? How
quickly can they get this in front of users? Without user feedback, we
are flying blind, so there should be as short of an interval as
possible.
