---
title: "What Comes After Hackathons?"
date: 2022-08-23T20:32:39-04:00
draft: true
---

It's probably not a controversial statement to say that hackathons are
on the decline. There was a period in the mid-2010's where they were
all the rage. University hackathons routinely roped in hundreds if not
thousands of people; sponsors provided thousands of dollars worth of
merch, prizes and plain cash; publications wrote about them with an
impressively hagiographic tone. It made sense for the time. The tech
industry was still a few years away from the Cambridge Analytica
scandal and enjoyed a relatively positive reception. Hustle culture
was in full bloom, with people encouraging side gigs, and
fake-it-till-you-make-it strategies. Concerns around mental health and
late stage capitalism, while present, were not as popular a dialogue
as today. And of course, nobody blinked an eye at having an event of a
thousand people in close proximity for 48 hours.

Now, the scene is much different. In person events are back, but the
sitting on a plastic chair in a gym, eating junk food and not
sleeping, all for the potential upside of a few hundred dollar gift
card, well that just doesn't appeal as it once did.

As you can probably tell, I don't mourn hackathons. I did quite a few,
even won some prizes, and they were rather grueling, painful
events. You'd end up slapping together some front end that didn't work
without some *ahem* manual intervention, pitch it as the breakthrough
to save the world, while surviving on minimal sleep.

That said, I do miss certain aspects of hackathons. For one, I miss
how they were a way to speed run a project. Projects are a great way
to add content to a resume when you don't have any job experience. I
got into hackathons when I was on a gap year and struggling to find a
job. They helped me grow my network and get projects on my resume. I
could go to one hackathon and end up with something that I could talk
about during an interview. Nevermind it was a hacked together
prototype; it was still code written.

For a lot of students who are too busy between school and social life
to work on a project, a hackathon was a chance to set aside some time
to build. And not only build, but build a lot. It's really hard to
keep a project going when you only have a couple hours a week to work
on it. You don't get that sense of velocity and excitement from a
couple hours a week. Hackathons took projects and turned them into
frenzied, competitive events. You'd get to see your progress and race
against the other teams.

Hackathons also gave confidence, at times a little too much
confidence. They encouraged you to build something ridiculously
ambitious in a short amount of time. And sometimes, you'd realize that
the bones of an impressive seeming app like Facebook or Twitter, well
they were feasible to do in a hackathon. Sure, sure, it's a fallacy to
say that [you can do it in a
weekend](https://danluu.com/sounds-easy/), but it's also a good
attitude when you're starting out! Too many beginners are at the other
end of the spectrum and don't attempt anything ambitious. The
ambitious beginners are the ones who end up learning quickly and end
up accomplishing the "impossible" tasks.

Is there a way to get the benefits of a hackathon without the
problematic, unhealthy aspects? I'm not sure. It's hard to strike a
balance between velocity and sustainability. But we might as well try.

Perhaps the solution is to have mini-hackathons, say 12 hours. A lot
of high school hackathons are around this length. I'd agree that 12
hours is about the maximum I'd advise for an event. It allows people
to get into a good workflow but not cut into their sleep. They're also
a lot cheaper to run.

However the issue with hackathons is not just the time, it's also the
format. Competition, while fun, does lead to prioritizing winning over
learning or fun. Now this is where someone pops in and says "buuuuuut
my hackathon has all of these awesome other activites not related to
the competition". Yes, but the competition is an inextricable part of
a hackathon. How many people would run a hackathon without the
competition? I don't think many people would show up for an event of
Jenga, iOS workshops, and junk food. Okay, maybe they would. That
doesn't sound half bad, but it wouldn't have the same widespread
appeal as a hackathon.

Which does beg the question, is it worth chasing that widespread
appeal? Maybe this was just a blip in the space-time continuum and
forever on after, hackathons/similar events will be small events. If
that's the case, I could live with that. There's something to be said
about not having festivals worshiping at the altar of big tech.

Back to alternatives, there's of course the hacker club model,
basically a weekly meeting where people work on various projects. It's
a nice model, but it's a much harder buy in versus a hackathon. You're
asking people to keep showing up and keep working on their
projects. Sure, they don't have to show up for every meeting, but in
my experience, if people miss a couple meetings, they quickly miss a
few more.

Most hacker clubs don't offer prizes, but I don't see why not. I will
say that prizes do lose their appeal when you extend the time
period. People may be willing to work their butt off for a day or two
to win a prize. They'll probably not work on a project for weeks on
end, because you've just turned a fun event into the worst paid
part-time job.

Instead they need to be motivated in a more sustainable
fashion. Obviously, intrinsic motivation is the best. If you teach
someone that programming is fun and cool, they'll do it for fun and
coolness. More on that in a second. Beyond that, what I've seen work
is a hacker club that has a deep enough network such that it can refer
consistent members to various companies. Again, this is basically the
hackathon model extended. Hackathons often have sponsors who send
employees to give out swag, offer prizes and give help on using the
company's software. An impressive student can often get a shortcut
into an interview via meeting these employees. This has worked for
hacker clubs, although it does generally limit a student's membership
to the length of their unemployment.

As for intrinsic motivation, that's hard. Maybe I'm biased by my
particular experiences, but in my experience a lot of CS majors are
not intrinsically motivated. That's not entirely their fault. It takes
a while to become experienced enough to do side projects and often
love of a subject grows with time. That doesn't mean intrinsic
motivation is impossible, however. What it means is that hacker clubs
need a few gimmicks to get people in the door for the first few
meetings, maybe free food for a person's first meeting; then the
possibility of a job for the next few; and then community and
intrinsic motivation for the rest. Most hacker clubs already do this,
but I think it's worth making the model explicit, so that organizers
can ensure that members hop on the next motivation before the previous
one wears off and the member stops showing up.
